My hypothesis was that there are more cases of people with untreated mental health issues in lower income neighborhoods than in higher income neighborhoods. I proved my hypothesis by examining the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) records which indicated the number of mental health related emergencies in each zip code of New York City. I also examined the National Provider Identifier (NPI) records which indicated the number of mental health professionals in each zip code. I first searched the EMS incident dispatch data for emotionally disturbed persons (EDP) calls. I created a file that included all of the zip codes listed in the EMS data and the corresponding number of EDP emergencies. I then used a US zip code dataset to compile a list of zip codes in New York City. I did this by searching for the zip codes that were listed as being a part of one of the five counties in New York City.  I then cross referenced the file that I compiled from the EMS data with the list of NYC zip codes in order to verify that they were all zip codes in NYC. Next, I searched the NPI data by taxonomy code which indicates the health professional's specialization. I looked up the taxonomy codes for mental health counselors, social workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, etc. I then used my list of NYC zip codes to create a file with the number of mental health professionals in each NYC zip code. I then used another US zip code dataset to find the populations of each zip code. I divided the number of emergencies in my first file, and professionals in my second file, by the population of the given zip code. My two files then contained the zip code and either the number of mental health emergencies per capita or the number of professionals per capita. Finally, I used a US average income dataset in order to find the average income of each zip code. I added this data to both of my existing files. I then plotted the data on a scatter plot with the average income of the zip code being the x-axis. I then used two y-axes, one to plot the number of emergencies per capita, and the other to plot the number of professionals per capita. I plotted the points of both results onto the same scatter plot in order to show my results side-by-side. Based on the result of my scatter plot, I concluded that my hypothesis was correct. My plot of the emergency data indicated that there are generally more occurrences of mental health related emergencies in lower income neighborhoods than in higher income neighborhoods. My plot of the professional data indicated that there are generally more mental health professionals located in higher income neighborhoods than in the lower income neighborhoods. These findings lead me to the conclusion that there are a greater number of people with untreated mental health issues in lower income areas of NYC than in higher income areas.
